---
title: Ex. 13.4
linktitle: Ex 13.4
type: book
date: "2021-01-02T00:00:00+01:00"
# Prev/next pager order (if `docs_section_pager` enabled in `params.toml`)
weight: 1
toc: false
---

???+ question "Ex. 13.4"
    Consider an image to be a function $F(x):\mathbb{R}^2\ra\mathbb{R}^1$ over the two-dimensional spatial domain (paper coordinates). Then $F(c+x_0+\bb{A}(x-x_0))$ represents an affine transformation of the image $F$, where $\bb{A}$ is a $2\times 2$ matrix.
	
    (a) Decompose $\bb{A}$ (via Q-R) in such a way that parameters identifying the four affine transformations (two scale, shear and rotation) are clearly identified.
    
    (b) Using the chain rule, show that the derivative of $F(c+x_0+\bb{A}(x-x_0))$ w.r.t. each of these parameters can be represented in terms of the two spatial derivatives of $F$.
    
    (c) Using a two-dimensional kernel smoother (Chapter 6), describe how to implement this procedure when the images are quantized to $16\times16$ pixels.
	
??? done "Soln. 13.4"
    (a) In this representation, $c$ accounts for location shifts, $x_0$ is the center of rotation, scaling and shear and $\bb{A}\in \mathbb{R}^{2\times 2}$ is a transformation matrix with QR decomposition $\bb{A}=R(\theta)T$, where $R$ is a rotation matrix and $T$ is an upper-triangular scale/shear matrix.
	
    (b) The first order Taylor series approximation has the form
	
    \begin{eqnarray}
		F^T(x, c, A) &=& F(x) + \sum_{\alpha \in\{c, \theta, T\}}\frac{\partial F}{\partial \alpha}(\alpha-\alpha_0)\non\\
		&=&F(x) + \nabla F(x)^T\sum_{\alpha\in \{c, \theta, T\}}\frac{\partial Z(x, x_0, c, A)}{\alpha}(\alpha-\alpha_0),\non
	\end{eqnarray}
	
    where $Z(x, x_0, c, A) := c+ x_0 + \bb{A}(x-x_0)$.

	This leads to the following six derivative (tangent) function $F_\alpha(x)$:
    
    * *x-location*: $\alpha = c_1$ and $F_\alpha = F_x(z) = \frac{\partial F(z)}{\partial x}$
		
    * *y-location*: $\alpha = c_2$ and $F_\alpha = F_y(z) = \frac{\partial F(z)}{\partial y}$
		
    * *x-scale*: $\alpha = T_{11}$ and $F_\alpha = (x-x_0)F_x(z)$
		
    * *y-scale*: $\alpha = T_{22}$ and $F_\alpha = (y-y_0)F_y(z)$
		
    * *Rotation*: $\alpha = \theta$ and $F_\alpha = (y-y_0)F_x(z) - (x-x_0)F_y(z)$
		
    * *Shear*: $\alpha = T_{12}$ and $F_\alpha = (y-y_0)F_x(z) + (x-x_0)F_y(z)$

	(c) As we move to the digitized $16 \times 16$ pixels, we need to evaluate $F_x$ and $F_y$ at the same set of lattice points. We can just smooth the image first and then use the first differences to approximate $F_x$ and $F_y$. 

	Please refer to \cite{hastie1997metrics} for detailed discussions.