---
title: Ex. 3.26
linktitle: Ex 3.26
type: book
date: "2021-01-02T00:00:00+01:00"
# Prev/next pager order (if `docs_section_pager` enabled in `params.toml`)
weight: 12
toc: false
---

???+ question "Ex. 3.26"
    Forward stepwise regression enters the variable at each step that most reduces the residual sum-of-squares. LAR adjusts variables that have the most (absolute) correlation with the current residuals. Show that these two entry criteria are not necessarily the same. 
    
    [Hint: let $\bx_{j.\mathcal{A}}$ be the $j$th variable, linearly adjusted for all the variables currently in the model. Show that the first criterion amounts to identifying the $j$ for which $\text{Cor}(\bx_{j.\mathcal{A}}, \bb{r})$ is largest in magnitude].

??? done "Soln. 3.26"
    The hint is derived in [Ex. 3.9](ex3-09.md). Therefore, the difference between forward stepwise regression and LAR becomes clearer. The former *chooses and includes* the variable while the latter *chooses, adjusts and then includes* the same variable.

	The paragraph below is cited from Section 2 in [Least Angle Regression](https://statweb.stanford.edu/~tibs/ftp/lars.pdf).

	``The LARS procedure works roughly as follows. As with classic Forward Selection, we start with all coefficients equal to zero, and find the predictor most correlated with the response, say $x_{j1}$ . We take the largest step possible in the direction of this predictor until some other predictor, say $x_{j2}$ , has as much correlation with the current residual. At this point LARS parts company with Forward Selection. Instead of continuing along $x_{j1}$ , LARS proceeds in a direction
	equiangular between the two predictors until a third variable $x_{j3}$ earns its way into the “most correlated” set. LARS then proceeds equiangularly between $x_{j1}$ , $x_{j2}$ and $x_{j3}$ , that is, along the “least angle direction,” until a fourth variable enters, and so on."