---
title: Ex. 5.2
linktitle: Ex 5.2
type: book
date: "2021-01-02T00:00:00+01:00"
# Prev/next pager order (if `docs_section_pager` enabled in `params.toml`)
weight: 1
toc: false
---

???+ question "Ex. 5.2"
    Suppose that $B_{i,M}(x)$ is an order-$M$ $B$-spline defined in the Appendix on page 186 through the sequence (5.77)-(5.78).
    
    (a) Show by induction that $B_{i,M}(x) = 0$ for $x\not \in [\tau_i, \tau_{i+M}]$. This shows, for example, that the support of cubic $B$-splines is at most 5 knots.
    
    (b) Show by induction that $B_{i,M}(x) > 0$ for $x\in (\tau_i, \tau_{i+M})$. The $B$-splines are positive in the interior of their support.
    
    (c) Show by induction that $\sum_{i=1}^{K+M}B_{i,M}(x) = 1 \ \forall x\in [\xi_0, \xi_{K+1}]$.
    
    (d) Show that $B_{i,M}$ is a piecewise polynomial of order $M$ (degree M-1) on $[\xi_0, \xi_{K+1}]$, with breaks only at the knots $\xi_1,...,\xi_K$.
    
    (e) Show that an order-$M$ $B$-spline basis function is the density function of a convolution of $M$ uniform random variables.

??? warning 
    In (e), the claim does not seem to be true unless $\tau_{i+1}-\tau_{i}=1$. See details below.

??? done "Soln. 5.2"
    (a) For $B_{i,1}(x)$, by (5.77) we know that $B_{i,1}=0$ for $x\not \in [\tau_1, \tau_2]$. Assume that $B_{i, m-1}(x)=0$ for $x\not\in [\tau_i, \tau_{i+m-1}]$. If $x\not \in [\tau_i, \tau_{i+m}]$, then $x\not \in [\tau_i, \tau_{i+m-1}]$, thus $B_{i, m-1}(x) =0$ by our assumption. Similarly $x\not\in [\tau_{i+1}, \tau_{i+m}]$, thus $B_{i+1, m-1}(x) = 0$ by our assumption again. Therefore, by (5.78), for $x\not \in [\tau_i, \tau_{i+m}]$, we have $B_{i,m}(x) = 0$. By mathematical induction, the proof is complete. 

    For cubic $B$-splines, $M=4$, their support is at most $\tau_1, \tau_2, ..., \tau_5$, i.e., at most 5 knots.

    (b) For $B_{i,1}(x)$, by (5.77), $B_{i,1}(x) = 1 > 0$ for $x\in (\tau_1, \tau_2)$. Assume that $B_{i,m-1}(x) > 0$ for $x\in (\tau_{i}, \tau_{i+m-1})$. For any $x\in (\tau_i, \tau_{i+m})$, either $x\in (\tau_i, \tau_{i+m-1})$ or $x\in (\tau_{i+1}, \tau_{i+m})$. In either case, by (5.78) and our assumption, we have $B_{i, m}(x) > 0$. Therefore, the proof is complete.

    (c) When $M=1$, by (5.77) we have $\sum_{i=1}^{K+1}B_{i,M}(x) = 1$ for $x\in [\xi_0,\xi_{K+1}]$. Suppose that the same holds for $M=m-1$, i.e., $\sum_{i=1}^{K+m-1}B_{i, m-1}(x)$ for $x\in [\xi_0, \xi_{K+1}]$.

    Let's move to the case when $M=m$ now. 
    By (a), we have $B_{1, m-1}(x) =0$ for $x\not\in [\tau_1, \tau_{m}]$, thus also for $x\not\in [\xi_0,\xi_{K+1}]$. Similarly, $B_{K+m, m-1}(x)=0$ and $B_{K+m+1, m-1}(x)=0$ for $x\not\in [\xi_0,\xi_{K+1}]$.

    By (5.78), we have $x \in [\xi_0,\xi_{K+1}]$

    \begin{eqnarray}
    \sum_{i=1}^{K+m}B_{i,m}(x) &=& \sum_{i=1}^{K+m}\left[\frac{x-\tau_i}{\tau_{i+m-1}-\tau_i}B_{i,m-1}(x) + \frac{\tau_{i+m}-x}{\tau_{i+m}-\tau_{i+1}}B_{i+1, m-1}(x)\right]\non\\
    &=&\sum_{i=1}^{K+m}\frac{x-\tau_i}{\tau_{i+m-1}-\tau_i}B_{i, m-1}(x) + \sum_{i=1}^{K+m}\frac{\tau_{i+m}-x}{\tau_{i+m}-\tau_{i+1}}B_{i+1, m-1}(x)\non\\
    &=&\sum_{i=2}^{K+m-1}\frac{x-\tau_i}{\tau_{i+m-1}-\tau_i}B_{i, m-1}(x) + \sum_{i=2}^{K+m-1}\frac{\tau_{i+m-1}-x}{\tau_{i+m-1}-\tau_{i}}B_{i, m-1}(x)\non\\ 
		    &=&\sum_{i=2}^{K+m-1} \left(\frac{x-\tau_i}{\tau_{i+m-1}-\tau_i} + \frac{\tau_{i+m-1}-x}{\tau_{i+m-1}-\tau_{i}}\right)B_{i, m-1}(x)\non\\
		    &=&\sum_{i=1}^{K+m-1}B_{i, m-1}(x)\non\\
		    &=&1.\non
    \end{eqnarray}

    Thus the proof is complete.

    (d) Again we use induction. When $M=1$, by (5.77), $B_{i,1}$ is a piecewise polynomial of order 1 on $[\xi_0, \xi_{K+1}]$ with breaks only at the knots $\xi_1,...,\xi_K$. Suppose the same holds true for $M=m-1$, by (5.78), $B_{i,m}$ increases 1 order because $x$ multipliy by $B_{i,m-1}(x)$ in both summands. It's easy to see the break points remain the same.

    (e) Note that the claim does not seem to be true unless $\tau_{i+1}-\tau_{i}=1$. For example, consider $B_{i,1}(x) = \bb{1}([\tau_i, \tau_{i+1}))$. We have 
		
    \begin{equation}
        \int B_{i,1}(x)dx = \tau_{i+1} - \tau_i.\non
    \end{equation}

    So unless $\tau_{i+1}-\tau_i=1$, $B_{i,1}$ is not a density function. With this condition, we see that (5.78) in the text reduces to 

    \begin{equation}
			B_{i,m}(x) = \frac{x-\tau_i}{m-1}B_{i,m-1}(x) + \frac{\tau_{i+m}-x}{m-1}B_{i+1,m-1}(x),\non
    \end{equation}

    for each $i=1,...,K+2M-m$. 

    Now it's easy to verify that $B_{i,m}$ is a convolution of $B_{i,m-1}$ and the density function, denoted as $f$, of $U(0,1)$ where $U$ is uniformly distributed on $[0,1]$, thus the claim is true. For example, when $m=2$, by the definition above, we have

    \begin{equation}
        B_{i,2}(x) = \begin{cases}
            x - \tau_i & \text{ if } x\in [\tau_i, \tau_{i+1})\non\\
            \tau_{i+2} - x & \text{ if } x\in [\tau_{i+1}, \tau_{i+2})\non\\
            0 & \text{otherwise}.
        \end{cases}
    \end{equation} 

    On the other hand, it's easy to verify that

    \begin{equation}
        \int f(x-y)B_{i,1}(y)dy = \begin{cases}
            x - \tau_i & \text{ if } x\in [\tau_i, \tau_{i+1})\non\\
            \tau_{i+2} - x & \text{ if } x\in [\tau_{i+1}, \tau_{i+2})\non\\
            0 & \text{otherwise}.
        \end{cases}
    \end{equation}

    So we know that the claim holds for $m=2$.